README.md, before:


<!-- README.md is generated from README.Rmd. Please edit that file -->

# queryparser <img src="man/figures/logo.png" align="right" width="120" />

<!-- badges: start -->

[![CRAN
status](https://www.r-pkg.org/badges/version/queryparser)](https://cran.r-project.org/package=queryparser)
[![Travis build
status](https://travis-ci.org/ianmcook/queryparser.svg?branch=master)](https://travis-ci.org/ianmcook/queryparser)
[![AppVeyor build
status](https://ci.appveyor.com/api/projects/status/github/ianmcook/queryparser?branch=master&svg=true)](https://ci.appveyor.com/project/ianmcook/queryparser)
[![Codecov test
coverage](https://codecov.io/gh/ianmcook/queryparser/branch/master/graph/badge.svg)](https://codecov.io/gh/ianmcook/queryparser?branch=master)
<!-- badges: end -->

**queryparser** translates SQL queries into lists of unevaluated R
expressions.

| ⚠️ Most R users should not directly use queryparser. Instead, use it through [tidyquery](https://github.com/ianmcook/tidyquery). |
| -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |

## Installation

Install the released version of **queryparser** from
[CRAN](https://CRAN.R-project.org/package=queryparser) with:

``` r
install.packages("queryparser")
```

Or install the development version from
[GitHub](https://github.com/ianmcook/queryparser) with:

``` r
# install.packages("devtools")
devtools::install_github("ianmcook/queryparser")
```

## Usage

Call the function `parse_query()`, passing a `SELECT` statement enclosed
in quotes as the first argument:

``` r
library(queryparser)

parse_query("SELECT DISTINCT carrier FROM flights WHERE dest = 'HNL'")
#> $select
#> $select[[1]]
#> carrier
#> 
#> attr(,"distinct")
#> [1] TRUE
#> 
#> $from
#> $from[[1]]
#> flights
#> 
#> 
#> $where
#> $where[[1]]
#> dest == "HNL"
```

Queries can include the clauses `SELECT`, `FROM`, `WHERE`, `GROUP BY`,
`HAVING`, `ORDER BY`, and `LIMIT`:

``` r
parse_query(
" SELECT origin, dest,
    COUNT(flight) AS num_flts,
    round(SUM(seats)) AS num_seats,
    round(AVG(arr_delay)) AS avg_delay
  FROM flights f LEFT OUTER JOIN planes p
    ON f.tailnum = p.tailnum
  WHERE distance BETWEEN 200 AND 300
    AND air_time IS NOT NULL
  GROUP BY origin, dest
  HAVING num_flts > 3000
  ORDER BY num_seats DESC, avg_delay ASC
  LIMIT 2;"
)
#> $select
#> $select[[1]]
#> origin
#> 
#> $select[[2]]
#> dest
#> 
#> $select$num_flts
#> sum(!is.na(flight))
#> 
#> $select$num_seats
#> round(sum(seats, na.rm = TRUE))
#> 
#> $select$avg_delay
#> round(mean(arr_delay, na.rm = TRUE))
#> 
#> attr(,"aggregate")
#>                      num_flts num_seats avg_delay 
#>     FALSE     FALSE      TRUE      TRUE      TRUE 
#> 
#> $from
#> $from$f
#> flights
#> 
#> $from$p
#> planes
#> 
#> attr(,"join_types")
#> [1] "left outer join"
#> attr(,"join_conditions")
#> attr(,"join_conditions")[[1]]
#> f.tailnum == p.tailnum
#> 
#> 
#> $where
#> $where[[1]]
#> (distance >= 200 & distance <= 300) & !is.na(air_time)
#> 
#> 
#> $group_by
#> $group_by[[1]]
#> origin
#> 
#> $group_by[[2]]
#> dest
#> 
#> 
#> $having
#> $having[[1]]
#> num_flts > 3000
#> 
#> 
#> $order_by
#> $order_by[[1]]
#> -xtfrm(num_seats)
#> 
#> $order_by[[2]]
#> avg_delay
#> 
#> attr(,"aggregate")
#> [1] FALSE FALSE
#> 
#> $limit
#> $limit[[1]]
#> [1] 2
#> 
#> 
#> attr(,"aggregate")
#> [1] TRUE
```

Set the argument `tidyverse` to `TRUE` to use functions from
[tidyverse](https://www.tidyverse.org) packages including
[dplyr](https://dplyr.tidyverse.org),
[stringr](https://stringr.tidyverse.org), and
[lubridate](https://lubridate.tidyverse.org) in the R expressions:

``` r
parse_query("SELECT COUNT(*) AS n FROM t WHERE x BETWEEN y AND z ORDER BY n DESC", tidyverse = TRUE)
#> $select
#> $select$n
#> dplyr::n()
#> 
#> attr(,"aggregate")
#>    n 
#> TRUE 
#> 
#> $from
#> $from[[1]]
#> t
#> 
#> 
#> $where
#> $where[[1]]
#> dplyr::between(x, y, z)
#> 
#> 
#> $order_by
#> $order_by[[1]]
#> dplyr::desc(n)
#> 
#> attr(,"aggregate")
#> [1] FALSE
#> 
#> attr(,"aggregate")
#> [1] TRUE
```

**queryparser** will translate only explicitly allowed functions and
operators, preventing injection of malicious code:

``` r
parse_query("SELECT x FROM y WHERE system('rm -rf /')")
#> Error: Unrecognized function or operator: system
```

## Current Limitations

**queryparser** does not currently support:

  - Subqueries
  - Unions
  - SQL-89-style (implicit) join notation
  - The `WITH` clause (common table expressions)
  - `OVER` expressions (window or analytic functions)
  - Some SQL functions and operators

**queryparser** currently has the following known limitations:

  - Some SQL expressions will translate only when `tidyverse` is set to
    `TRUE`. An example of this is `COUNT(DISTINCT )` expressions with
    multiple arguments.
  - When logical operators (such as `IS NULL`) have unparenthesized
    expressions as their operands, R will interpret the resulting code
    using a different order of operations than a SQL engine would. When
    using an expression as the operand to a logical operator, always
    enclose the expression in parentheses.
  - When `tidyverse` is set to `TRUE`, SQL expressions that use `CASE`
    or `coalesce()` with `NULL`s in the arguments can return expressions
    that throw data type errors when evaluated. This is because `NULL`
    translates to `NA`, which is by default a logical constant (not a
    numeric, integer, or character constant). To work around this, cast
    `NULL` to the expected data type in the SQL expression.
  - The error messages that occur when attempting to parse invalid or
    unrecognized SQL are often non-informative.

## Non-Goals

**queryparser** is not intended to:

  - Translate other types of SQL statements (such as `INSERT` or
    `UPDATE`)
  - Customize translations for specific SQL dialects
  - Fully validate the syntax of the `SELECT` statements passed to it
  - Efficiently process large batches of queries
  - Facilitate the analysis of queries (for example, to identify
    patterns)

## Related Work

The **sqlparseR** package
([CRAN](https://cran.r-project.org/package=sqlparseR)) provides a
wrapper around the Python module **sqlparse**.

Commit message:

Add link to video of rstudio::conf(2020) talk [skip ci]

README.md, after:


<!-- README.md is generated from README.Rmd. Please edit that file -->

# queryparser <img src="man/figures/logo.png" align="right" width="120" />

<!-- badges: start -->

[![CRAN
status](https://www.r-pkg.org/badges/version/queryparser)](https://cran.r-project.org/package=queryparser)
[![Travis build
status](https://travis-ci.org/ianmcook/queryparser.svg?branch=master)](https://travis-ci.org/ianmcook/queryparser)
[![AppVeyor build
status](https://ci.appveyor.com/api/projects/status/github/ianmcook/queryparser?branch=master&svg=true)](https://ci.appveyor.com/project/ianmcook/queryparser)
[![Codecov test
coverage](https://codecov.io/gh/ianmcook/queryparser/branch/master/graph/badge.svg)](https://codecov.io/gh/ianmcook/queryparser?branch=master)
<!-- badges: end -->

**queryparser** translates SQL queries into lists of unevaluated R
expressions.

| ⚠️ Most R users should not directly use queryparser. Instead, use it through [tidyquery](https://github.com/ianmcook/tidyquery). |
| -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |

For an introduction to **tidyquery** and **queryparser**, watch the
recording of the talk [“Bridging the Gap between SQL and
R”](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JwP5KdWSgqE) from
rstudio::conf(2020).

## Installation

Install the released version of **queryparser** from
[CRAN](https://CRAN.R-project.org/package=queryparser) with:

``` r
install.packages("queryparser")
```

Or install the development version from
[GitHub](https://github.com/ianmcook/queryparser) with:

``` r
# install.packages("devtools")
devtools::install_github("ianmcook/queryparser")
```

## Usage

Call the function `parse_query()`, passing a `SELECT` statement enclosed
in quotes as the first argument:

``` r
library(queryparser)

parse_query("SELECT DISTINCT carrier FROM flights WHERE dest = 'HNL'")
#> $select
#> $select[[1]]
#> carrier
#> 
#> attr(,"distinct")
#> [1] TRUE
#> 
#> $from
#> $from[[1]]
#> flights
#> 
#> 
#> $where
#> $where[[1]]
#> dest == "HNL"
```

Queries can include the clauses `SELECT`, `FROM`, `WHERE`, `GROUP BY`,
`HAVING`, `ORDER BY`, and `LIMIT`:

``` r
parse_query(
" SELECT origin, dest,
    COUNT(flight) AS num_flts,
    round(SUM(seats)) AS num_seats,
    round(AVG(arr_delay)) AS avg_delay
  FROM flights f LEFT OUTER JOIN planes p
    ON f.tailnum = p.tailnum
  WHERE distance BETWEEN 200 AND 300
    AND air_time IS NOT NULL
  GROUP BY origin, dest
  HAVING num_flts > 3000
  ORDER BY num_seats DESC, avg_delay ASC
  LIMIT 2;"
)
#> $select
#> $select[[1]]
#> origin
#> 
#> $select[[2]]
#> dest
#> 
#> $select$num_flts
#> sum(!is.na(flight))
#> 
#> $select$num_seats
#> round(sum(seats, na.rm = TRUE))
#> 
#> $select$avg_delay
#> round(mean(arr_delay, na.rm = TRUE))
#> 
#> attr(,"aggregate")
#>                      num_flts num_seats avg_delay 
#>     FALSE     FALSE      TRUE      TRUE      TRUE 
#> 
#> $from
#> $from$f
#> flights
#> 
#> $from$p
#> planes
#> 
#> attr(,"join_types")
#> [1] "left outer join"
#> attr(,"join_conditions")
#> attr(,"join_conditions")[[1]]
#> f.tailnum == p.tailnum
#> 
#> 
#> $where
#> $where[[1]]
#> (distance >= 200 & distance <= 300) & !is.na(air_time)
#> 
#> 
#> $group_by
#> $group_by[[1]]
#> origin
#> 
#> $group_by[[2]]
#> dest
#> 
#> 
#> $having
#> $having[[1]]
#> num_flts > 3000
#> 
#> 
#> $order_by
#> $order_by[[1]]
#> -xtfrm(num_seats)
#> 
#> $order_by[[2]]
#> avg_delay
#> 
#> attr(,"aggregate")
#> [1] FALSE FALSE
#> 
#> $limit
#> $limit[[1]]
#> [1] 2
#> 
#> 
#> attr(,"aggregate")
#> [1] TRUE
```

Set the argument `tidyverse` to `TRUE` to use functions from
[tidyverse](https://www.tidyverse.org) packages including
[dplyr](https://dplyr.tidyverse.org),
[stringr](https://stringr.tidyverse.org), and
[lubridate](https://lubridate.tidyverse.org) in the R expressions:

``` r
parse_query("SELECT COUNT(*) AS n FROM t WHERE x BETWEEN y AND z ORDER BY n DESC", tidyverse = TRUE)
#> $select
#> $select$n
#> dplyr::n()
#> 
#> attr(,"aggregate")
#>    n 
#> TRUE 
#> 
#> $from
#> $from[[1]]
#> t
#> 
#> 
#> $where
#> $where[[1]]
#> dplyr::between(x, y, z)
#> 
#> 
#> $order_by
#> $order_by[[1]]
#> dplyr::desc(n)
#> 
#> attr(,"aggregate")
#> [1] FALSE
#> 
#> attr(,"aggregate")
#> [1] TRUE
```

**queryparser** will translate only explicitly allowed functions and
operators, preventing injection of malicious code:

``` r
parse_query("SELECT x FROM y WHERE system('rm -rf /')")
#> Error: Unrecognized function or operator: system
```

## Current Limitations

**queryparser** does not currently support:

  - Subqueries
  - Unions
  - SQL-89-style (implicit) join notation
  - The `WITH` clause (common table expressions)
  - `OVER` expressions (window or analytic functions)
  - Some SQL functions and operators

**queryparser** currently has the following known limitations:

  - Some SQL expressions will translate only when `tidyverse` is set to
    `TRUE`. An example of this is `COUNT(DISTINCT )` expressions with
    multiple arguments.
  - When logical operators (such as `IS NULL`) have unparenthesized
    expressions as their operands, R will interpret the resulting code
    using a different order of operations than a SQL engine would. When
    using an expression as the operand to a logical operator, always
    enclose the expression in parentheses.
  - When `tidyverse` is set to `TRUE`, SQL expressions that use `CASE`
    or `coalesce()` with `NULL`s in the arguments can return expressions
    that throw data type errors when evaluated. This is because `NULL`
    translates to `NA`, which is by default a logical constant (not a
    numeric, integer, or character constant). To work around this, cast
    `NULL` to the expected data type in the SQL expression.
  - The error messages that occur when attempting to parse invalid or
    unrecognized SQL are often non-informative.

## Non-Goals

**queryparser** is not intended to:

  - Translate other types of SQL statements (such as `INSERT` or
    `UPDATE`)
  - Customize translations for specific SQL dialects
  - Fully validate the syntax of the `SELECT` statements passed to it
  - Efficiently process large batches of queries
  - Facilitate the analysis of queries (for example, to identify
    patterns)

## Related Work

The **sqlparseR** package
([CRAN](https://cran.r-project.org/package=sqlparseR)) provides a
wrapper around the Python module **sqlparse**.
